docs/KEYS.md, before:

# Key Management & CSR Operations

This guide covers private key generation, management, and Certificate Signing Request (CSR) operations.

> **Related documentation:**
> - [CA.md](CA.md) - CA initialization and certificate issuance
> - [CREDENTIALS.md](CREDENTIALS.md) - Bundled key + certificate lifecycle
> - [HSM.md](HSM.md) - Hardware Security Module integration

## 1. Key Management

### key gen

Generate a private key file.

The output file contains the private key in PEM format. The public key is mathematically derived from the private key and is not stored separately. To extract the public key, use `qpki key pub`.

```bash
qpki key gen [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--algorithm` | `-a` | ecdsa-p256 | Key algorithm |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Key passphrase |

**Algorithms:**

| Algorithm | Description | Security |
|-----------|-------------|----------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ECDSA with NIST P-256 curve | ~128-bit |
| ecdsa-p384 | ECDSA with NIST P-384 curve | ~192-bit |
| ecdsa-p521 | ECDSA with NIST P-521 curve | ~256-bit |
| ed25519 | Edwards-curve DSA | ~128-bit |
| rsa-2048 | RSA 2048-bit | ~112-bit |
| rsa-4096 | RSA 4096-bit | ~140-bit |
| ml-dsa-44 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 1 | NIST Level 1 |
| ml-dsa-65 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 3 | NIST Level 3 |
| ml-dsa-87 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 5 | NIST Level 5 |

**Examples:**

```bash
# ECDSA P-256 key (default)
qpki key gen --algorithm ecdsa-p256 --out key.pem

# Ed25519 key
qpki key gen --algorithm ed25519 --out ed25519.key

# PQC key (ML-DSA)
qpki key gen --algorithm ml-dsa-65 --out pqc.key

# Encrypted key
qpki key gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --out secure.key --passphrase "secret"
```

### key pub

Extract the public key from a private key file.

```bash
qpki key pub [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--key` | `-k` | required | Input private key file |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output public key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for encrypted key |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Extract public key from ECDSA key
qpki key pub --key private.pem --out public.pem

# Extract from encrypted key
qpki key pub --key encrypted.key --passphrase "secret" --out public.pem

# Extract from PQC key
qpki key pub --key mldsa.key --out mldsa.pub
```

### key list

List private keys in a directory or HSM token.

```bash
qpki key list [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--dir` | `-d` | . | Directory to scan |
| `--hsm-config` | | | HSM configuration file |

**Examples:**

```bash
# List keys in directory
qpki key list --dir ./keys

# List keys in HSM token
qpki key list --hsm-config ./hsm.yaml
```

### key info

Display information about a private key.

```bash
qpki key info <key-file> [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--passphrase` | `-p` | "" | Passphrase for encrypted key |

**Example:**

```bash
qpki key info private.key
```

### key convert

Convert a private key to a different format.

```bash
qpki key convert [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--key` | `-k` | required | Input key file |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output key file |
| `--format` | `-f` | pem | Output format: pem, der, pkcs8 |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for input key |
| `--out-passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for output key |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Convert PEM to DER
qpki key convert --key private.pem --out private.der --format der

# Add passphrase protection
qpki key convert --key private.pem --out encrypted.pem --out-passphrase "secret"
```

---

## 2. Certificate Signing Requests (CSR)

### csr gen

Generate a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) for submission to a CA.

```bash
qpki csr gen [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--algorithm` | `-a` | "" | Key algorithm for new key |
| `--keyout` | | "" | Output file for new private key |
| `--key` | | "" | Existing private key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for existing key |
| `--key-passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for new key |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output CSR file |
| `--cn` | | required | Common Name |
| `--org` | `-O` | "" | Organization |
| `--country` | `-C` | "" | Country (2-letter code) |
| `--dns` | | [] | DNS SANs |
| `--email` | | [] | Email SANs |
| `--ip` | | [] | IP SANs |
| `--hybrid` | | "" | PQC algorithm for hybrid CSR |
| `--hybrid-keyout` | | "" | Output file for hybrid PQC key |
| `--attest-cert` | | "" | Attestation certificate (RFC 9883) |
| `--attest-key` | | "" | Attestation private key (RFC 9883) |

**Modes:**

| Mode | Description | Command |
|------|-------------|---------|
| Classical | RSA, ECDSA, Ed25519 via Go x509 | `--algorithm ecdsa-p256` |
| PQC Signature | ML-DSA, SLH-DSA (custom PKCS#10) | `--algorithm ml-dsa-65` |
| PQC KEM | ML-KEM with RFC 9883 attestation | `--algorithm ml-kem-768 --attest-cert ...` |
| Catalyst | ITU-T X.509 dual signatures | `--algorithm ecdsa-p384 --hybrid ml-dsa-87` |
| Composite | IETF draft-13 combined signature | `--algorithm ecdsa-p384 --composite ml-dsa-87` |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Classical ECDSA CSR
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p256 --keyout server.key \
    --cn server.example.com --dns server.example.com --out server.csr

# PQC ML-DSA CSR (direct signature)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ml-dsa-65 --keyout mldsa.key \
    --cn alice@example.com --out mldsa.csr

# PQC ML-KEM CSR with RFC 9883 attestation
# (requires an existing signature certificate for attestation)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ml-kem-768 --keyout kem.key \
    --cn alice@example.com \
    --attest-cert sign.crt --attest-key sign.key \
    --out kem.csr

# Catalyst hybrid CSR (ITU-T X.509 - recommended for backward compatibility)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --hybrid ml-dsa-87 \
    --keyout classical.key --hybrid-keyout pqc.key \
    --cn example.com --out catalyst.csr

# Composite CSR (IETF draft-13 - single combined signature)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --composite ml-dsa-87 \
    --keyout classical.key --hybrid-keyout pqc.key \
    --cn example.com --out composite.csr

# CSR with existing key
qpki csr gen --key existing.key --cn server.example.com --out server.csr
```

**Catalyst Combinations (--algorithm + --hybrid):**

Creates a CSR with dual signatures per ITU-T X.509 (2019) Section 9.8.
Both classical and PQC signatures are independent, allowing backward compatibility.

| --algorithm | --hybrid | Security Level |
|-------------|----------|----------------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ml-dsa-44, ml-dsa-65 | 128-bit |
| ecdsa-p384 | ml-dsa-65, ml-dsa-87 | 192-bit |
| ecdsa-p521 | ml-dsa-87 | 256-bit |
| ed25519 | ml-dsa-44, ml-dsa-65 | 128-bit |
| ed448 | ml-dsa-87 | 224-bit |

**Composite Combinations (--algorithm + --composite):**

Creates a CSR with a combined composite signature per IETF draft-ietf-lamps-pq-composite-sigs-13.
The signature is atomic - both components must be verified together.
Only IANA-allocated OIDs are supported.

| --algorithm | --composite | OID | Security Level |
|-------------|-------------|-----|----------------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ml-dsa-65 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.45 | Level 3 |
| ecdsa-p384 | ml-dsa-65 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.46 | Level 3 |
| ecdsa-p521 | ml-dsa-87 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.54 | Level 5 |

**RFC 9883 (ML-KEM Attestation):**

ML-KEM keys cannot sign (they're Key Encapsulation Mechanisms). To prove possession of an ML-KEM private key, RFC 9883 defines the `privateKeyPossessionStatement` attribute. This requires:

1. An existing signature certificate (`--attest-cert`)
2. The corresponding private key (`--attest-key`)

The CSR is signed by the attestation key, and includes a reference to the attestation certificate. The CA verifies the attestation chain before issuing the ML-KEM certificate.

### csr info

Display information about a CSR.

```bash
qpki csr info <csr-file>
```

**Example:**

```bash
qpki csr info server.csr
```

### csr verify

Verify the signature of a CSR.

```bash
qpki csr verify <csr-file>
```

**Example:**

```bash
qpki csr verify server.csr
```

---

## 3. Algorithm Reference

### Classical Algorithms

| Algorithm | Type | Key Size | Use Case |
|-----------|------|----------|----------|
| ecdsa-p256 | Signature | 256-bit | Default, wide compatibility |
| ecdsa-p384 | Signature | 384-bit | Recommended for new deployments |
| ecdsa-p521 | Signature | 521-bit | Maximum classical security |
| ed25519 | Signature | 256-bit | Fast, constant-time |
| rsa-2048 | Signature | 2048-bit | Legacy compatibility |
| rsa-4096 | Signature | 4096-bit | Legacy with higher security |

### Post-Quantum Algorithms

| Algorithm | Type | NIST Level | Use Case |
|-----------|------|------------|----------|
| ml-dsa-44 | Signature | Level 1 | ~AES-128 equivalent |
| ml-dsa-65 | Signature | Level 3 | ~AES-192 equivalent |
| ml-dsa-87 | Signature | Level 5 | ~AES-256 equivalent |
| ml-kem-512 | KEM | Level 1 | Key encapsulation |
| ml-kem-768 | KEM | Level 3 | Key encapsulation |
| ml-kem-1024 | KEM | Level 5 | Key encapsulation |

---

## See Also

- [CA](CA.md) - CA initialization and certificate issuance
- [CREDENTIALS](CREDENTIALS.md) - Bundled key + certificate lifecycle
- [HSM](HSM.md) - Hardware Security Module integration
- [CONCEPTS](CONCEPTS.md) - PQC and hybrid certificate concepts
- [CLI-REFERENCE](CLI-REFERENCE.md) - Complete command reference

Commit message:

docs: add intro sections to CA.md and KEYS.md for consistency
- Add "What is a CA?" section with CA structure, versioning, and types
- Add "What is a Key?" section with key types and CSR definition
- Renumber sections to follow CREDENTIALS.md pattern (intro → CLI → workflows)

docs/KEYS.md, after:

# Key Management & CSR Operations

This guide covers private key generation, management, and Certificate Signing Request (CSR) operations.

> **Related documentation:**
> - [CA.md](CA.md) - CA initialization and certificate issuance
> - [CREDENTIALS.md](CREDENTIALS.md) - Bundled key + certificate lifecycle
> - [HSM.md](HSM.md) - Hardware Security Module integration

## 1. What is a Key?

A **private key** is the cryptographic secret used for signing or decryption. QPKI supports classical (ECDSA, RSA, Ed25519) and post-quantum (ML-DSA, SLH-DSA, ML-KEM) algorithms.

### 1.1 Key Types

| Type | Purpose | Algorithms |
|------|---------|------------|
| Signature | Sign certificates, CMS, OCSP | ECDSA, Ed25519, RSA, ML-DSA, SLH-DSA |
| Key Encapsulation | Encrypt session keys | ML-KEM |

### 1.2 What is a CSR?

A **Certificate Signing Request (CSR)** is a message sent to a CA to request a certificate. It contains the public key and subject information, signed by the corresponding private key.

---

## 2. Key Management

### key gen

Generate a private key file.

The output file contains the private key in PEM format. The public key is mathematically derived from the private key and is not stored separately. To extract the public key, use `qpki key pub`.

```bash
qpki key gen [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--algorithm` | `-a` | ecdsa-p256 | Key algorithm |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Key passphrase |

**Algorithms:**

| Algorithm | Description | Security |
|-----------|-------------|----------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ECDSA with NIST P-256 curve | ~128-bit |
| ecdsa-p384 | ECDSA with NIST P-384 curve | ~192-bit |
| ecdsa-p521 | ECDSA with NIST P-521 curve | ~256-bit |
| ed25519 | Edwards-curve DSA | ~128-bit |
| rsa-2048 | RSA 2048-bit | ~112-bit |
| rsa-4096 | RSA 4096-bit | ~140-bit |
| ml-dsa-44 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 1 | NIST Level 1 |
| ml-dsa-65 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 3 | NIST Level 3 |
| ml-dsa-87 | ML-DSA (Dilithium) Level 5 | NIST Level 5 |

**Examples:**

```bash
# ECDSA P-256 key (default)
qpki key gen --algorithm ecdsa-p256 --out key.pem

# Ed25519 key
qpki key gen --algorithm ed25519 --out ed25519.key

# PQC key (ML-DSA)
qpki key gen --algorithm ml-dsa-65 --out pqc.key

# Encrypted key
qpki key gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --out secure.key --passphrase "secret"
```

### key pub

Extract the public key from a private key file.

```bash
qpki key pub [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--key` | `-k` | required | Input private key file |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output public key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for encrypted key |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Extract public key from ECDSA key
qpki key pub --key private.pem --out public.pem

# Extract from encrypted key
qpki key pub --key encrypted.key --passphrase "secret" --out public.pem

# Extract from PQC key
qpki key pub --key mldsa.key --out mldsa.pub
```

### key list

List private keys in a directory or HSM token.

```bash
qpki key list [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--dir` | `-d` | . | Directory to scan |
| `--hsm-config` | | | HSM configuration file |

**Examples:**

```bash
# List keys in directory
qpki key list --dir ./keys

# List keys in HSM token
qpki key list --hsm-config ./hsm.yaml
```

### key info

Display information about a private key.

```bash
qpki key info <key-file> [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--passphrase` | `-p` | "" | Passphrase for encrypted key |

**Example:**

```bash
qpki key info private.key
```

### key convert

Convert a private key to a different format.

```bash
qpki key convert [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--key` | `-k` | required | Input key file |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output key file |
| `--format` | `-f` | pem | Output format: pem, der, pkcs8 |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for input key |
| `--out-passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for output key |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Convert PEM to DER
qpki key convert --key private.pem --out private.der --format der

# Add passphrase protection
qpki key convert --key private.pem --out encrypted.pem --out-passphrase "secret"
```

---

## 3. Certificate Signing Requests (CSR)

### csr gen

Generate a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) for submission to a CA.

```bash
qpki csr gen [flags]
```

**Flags:**

| Flag | Short | Default | Description |
|------|-------|---------|-------------|
| `--algorithm` | `-a` | "" | Key algorithm for new key |
| `--keyout` | | "" | Output file for new private key |
| `--key` | | "" | Existing private key file |
| `--passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for existing key |
| `--key-passphrase` | | "" | Passphrase for new key |
| `--out` | `-o` | required | Output CSR file |
| `--cn` | | required | Common Name |
| `--org` | `-O` | "" | Organization |
| `--country` | `-C` | "" | Country (2-letter code) |
| `--dns` | | [] | DNS SANs |
| `--email` | | [] | Email SANs |
| `--ip` | | [] | IP SANs |
| `--hybrid` | | "" | PQC algorithm for hybrid CSR |
| `--hybrid-keyout` | | "" | Output file for hybrid PQC key |
| `--attest-cert` | | "" | Attestation certificate (RFC 9883) |
| `--attest-key` | | "" | Attestation private key (RFC 9883) |

**Modes:**

| Mode | Description | Command |
|------|-------------|---------|
| Classical | RSA, ECDSA, Ed25519 via Go x509 | `--algorithm ecdsa-p256` |
| PQC Signature | ML-DSA, SLH-DSA (custom PKCS#10) | `--algorithm ml-dsa-65` |
| PQC KEM | ML-KEM with RFC 9883 attestation | `--algorithm ml-kem-768 --attest-cert ...` |
| Catalyst | ITU-T X.509 dual signatures | `--algorithm ecdsa-p384 --hybrid ml-dsa-87` |
| Composite | IETF draft-13 combined signature | `--algorithm ecdsa-p384 --composite ml-dsa-87` |

**Examples:**

```bash
# Classical ECDSA CSR
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p256 --keyout server.key \
    --cn server.example.com --dns server.example.com --out server.csr

# PQC ML-DSA CSR (direct signature)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ml-dsa-65 --keyout mldsa.key \
    --cn alice@example.com --out mldsa.csr

# PQC ML-KEM CSR with RFC 9883 attestation
# (requires an existing signature certificate for attestation)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ml-kem-768 --keyout kem.key \
    --cn alice@example.com \
    --attest-cert sign.crt --attest-key sign.key \
    --out kem.csr

# Catalyst hybrid CSR (ITU-T X.509 - recommended for backward compatibility)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --hybrid ml-dsa-87 \
    --keyout classical.key --hybrid-keyout pqc.key \
    --cn example.com --out catalyst.csr

# Composite CSR (IETF draft-13 - single combined signature)
qpki csr gen --algorithm ecdsa-p384 --composite ml-dsa-87 \
    --keyout classical.key --hybrid-keyout pqc.key \
    --cn example.com --out composite.csr

# CSR with existing key
qpki csr gen --key existing.key --cn server.example.com --out server.csr
```

**Catalyst Combinations (--algorithm + --hybrid):**

Creates a CSR with dual signatures per ITU-T X.509 (2019) Section 9.8.
Both classical and PQC signatures are independent, allowing backward compatibility.

| --algorithm | --hybrid | Security Level |
|-------------|----------|----------------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ml-dsa-44, ml-dsa-65 | 128-bit |
| ecdsa-p384 | ml-dsa-65, ml-dsa-87 | 192-bit |
| ecdsa-p521 | ml-dsa-87 | 256-bit |
| ed25519 | ml-dsa-44, ml-dsa-65 | 128-bit |
| ed448 | ml-dsa-87 | 224-bit |

**Composite Combinations (--algorithm + --composite):**

Creates a CSR with a combined composite signature per IETF draft-ietf-lamps-pq-composite-sigs-13.
The signature is atomic - both components must be verified together.
Only IANA-allocated OIDs are supported.

| --algorithm | --composite | OID | Security Level |
|-------------|-------------|-----|----------------|
| ecdsa-p256 | ml-dsa-65 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.45 | Level 3 |
| ecdsa-p384 | ml-dsa-65 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.46 | Level 3 |
| ecdsa-p521 | ml-dsa-87 | 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.6.54 | Level 5 |

**RFC 9883 (ML-KEM Attestation):**

ML-KEM keys cannot sign (they're Key Encapsulation Mechanisms). To prove possession of an ML-KEM private key, RFC 9883 defines the `privateKeyPossessionStatement` attribute. This requires:

1. An existing signature certificate (`--attest-cert`)
2. The corresponding private key (`--attest-key`)

The CSR is signed by the attestation key, and includes a reference to the attestation certificate. The CA verifies the attestation chain before issuing the ML-KEM certificate.

### csr info

Display information about a CSR.

```bash
qpki csr info <csr-file>
```

**Example:**

```bash
qpki csr info server.csr
```

### csr verify

Verify the signature of a CSR.

```bash
qpki csr verify <csr-file>
```

**Example:**

```bash
qpki csr verify server.csr
```

---

## 4. Algorithm Reference

### Classical Algorithms

| Algorithm | Type | Key Size | Use Case |
|-----------|------|----------|----------|
| ecdsa-p256 | Signature | 256-bit | Default, wide compatibility |
| ecdsa-p384 | Signature | 384-bit | Recommended for new deployments |
| ecdsa-p521 | Signature | 521-bit | Maximum classical security |
| ed25519 | Signature | 256-bit | Fast, constant-time |
| rsa-2048 | Signature | 2048-bit | Legacy compatibility |
| rsa-4096 | Signature | 4096-bit | Legacy with higher security |

### Post-Quantum Algorithms

| Algorithm | Type | NIST Level | Use Case |
|-----------|------|------------|----------|
| ml-dsa-44 | Signature | Level 1 | ~AES-128 equivalent |
| ml-dsa-65 | Signature | Level 3 | ~AES-192 equivalent |
| ml-dsa-87 | Signature | Level 5 | ~AES-256 equivalent |
| ml-kem-512 | KEM | Level 1 | Key encapsulation |
| ml-kem-768 | KEM | Level 3 | Key encapsulation |
| ml-kem-1024 | KEM | Level 5 | Key encapsulation |

---

## See Also

- [CA](CA.md) - CA initialization and certificate issuance
- [CREDENTIALS](CREDENTIALS.md) - Bundled key + certificate lifecycle
- [HSM](HSM.md) - Hardware Security Module integration
- [CONCEPTS](CONCEPTS.md) - PQC and hybrid certificate concepts
- [CLI-REFERENCE](CLI-REFERENCE.md) - Complete command reference
