docs/OCSP.md, before:

# OCSP Responder

This guide covers the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responder implementation.

> **Related documentation:**
> - [CA.md](CA.md) - Certificate revocation with CRL
> - [CREDENTIALS.md](CREDENTIALS.md) - OCSP responder credentials

## 1. Overview

The OCSP implementation is compliant with **RFC 6960** (X.509 Internet PKI OCSP) and **RFC 5019** (Lightweight OCSP Profile). It supports classical algorithms (ECDSA, RSA, Ed25519), post-quantum (ML-DSA), and hybrid (Catalyst).

### OCSP vs CRL

| Criterion | CRL | OCSP |
|-----------|-----|------|
| Latency | Full download | Per-certificate query |
| Bandwidth | High (complete list) | Low (single response) |
| Real-time | No (update interval) | Yes |
| Privacy | No leakage | Responder sees queries |
| TLS Stapling | No | Yes |

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        OCSP Responder                               │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  ┌──────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐  │
│  │  HTTP Handler    │────│    Responder     │────│   CA Store   │  │
│  │  (GET + POST)    │    │    (RFC 6960)    │    │   (index)    │  │
│  └──────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └──────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Operation Modes:**

1. **Delegated Responder** (recommended)
   - Responder certificate with EKU `ocspSigning` (OID 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.9)
   - OCSP No Check extension to prevent recursion
   - Separate key from CA

2. **CA-Signed**
   - CA signs responses directly
   - Simpler but less flexible

---

## 2. CLI Commands

### ocsp sign

Create a signed OCSP response.

```bash
# Response "good" for valid certificate
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status good \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp

# Response "revoked" with reason
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status revoked \
  --revocation-time "2024-01-15T10:00:00Z" \
  --revocation-reason keyCompromise \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp

# Response "unknown"
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status unknown \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description | Default |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--serial` | Serial number (hex) | Required |
| `--status` | good, revoked, unknown | Required |
| `--ca` | CA certificate | Required |
| `--cert` | Responder certificate | Required |
| `--key` | Responder private key | Required |
| `--validity` | Response validity period | 1h |
| `--revocation-time` | Revocation date (RFC 3339) | - |
| `--revocation-reason` | CRL reason | - |
| `-o, --out` | Output file | stdout |

### ocsp verify

Verify an OCSP response.

```bash
# Basic verification
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt

# With target certificate
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt

# With nonce (replay protection)
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt --nonce 0102030405060708
```

### ocsp request

Create an OCSP request.

```bash
# Simple request
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt --out request.ocsp

# With nonce (recommended)
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt --nonce --out request.ocsp

# By serial number
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --serial 0A1B2C3D --out request.ocsp
```

### ocsp info

Display OCSP response information.

```bash
qpki ocsp info response.ocsp
```

### ocsp serve

Start an HTTP OCSP responder server.

```bash
# Delegated mode (dedicated responder cert)
qpki ocsp serve --port 8080 --ca-dir /path/to/ca \
  --cert responder.crt --key responder.key

# With custom validity
qpki ocsp serve --port 8080 --ca-dir /path/to/ca \
  --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --validity 24h
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description | Default |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--port` | HTTP port | 8080 |
| `--addr` | Full listen address | :8080 |
| `--ca-dir` | CA directory (with index.txt) | Required |
| `--cert` | Responder certificate | Required |
| `--key` | Responder private key | Required |
| `--validity` | Response validity | 1h |

---

## 3. Responder Profiles

```bash
# ECDSA (classical)
qpki credential enroll --profile ec/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=ocsp.example.com --id ocsp-responder

# ML-DSA (post-quantum)
qpki credential enroll --profile ml/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=pqc-ocsp.example.com --id pqc-ocsp-responder

# Hybrid Catalyst
qpki credential enroll --profile hybrid/catalyst/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=hybrid-ocsp.example.com --id hybrid-ocsp-responder
```

---

## 4. OpenSSL Interoperability

```bash
# Create request with OpenSSL
openssl ocsp -issuer ca.crt -cert server.crt -reqout request.ocsp -no_nonce

# Query the server
openssl ocsp -issuer ca.crt -cert server.crt \
  -url http://localhost:8080 -resp_text

# Verify a response
openssl ocsp -respin response.ocsp -CAfile ca.crt -resp_text
```

> **Note:** OpenSSL does not support ML-DSA. Use `qpki ocsp verify` for PQC responses.

---

## 5. OCSP No Check Extension

The `id-pkix-ocsp-nocheck` extension (OID 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1.5) indicates the responder certificate should not be checked via OCSP, avoiding infinite loops. This extension is automatically added to `ocsp-responder` profiles.

---

## See Also

- [CA](CA.md) - Certificate revocation with CRL
- [CREDENTIALS](CREDENTIALS.md) - OCSP responder credentials
- [RFC 6960](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6960) - OCSP specification
- [RFC 5019](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5019) - Lightweight OCSP Profile

Commit message:

docs: rename Overview to 'What is X?' for consistency

docs/OCSP.md, after:

# OCSP Responder

This guide covers the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responder implementation.

> **Related documentation:**
> - [CA.md](CA.md) - Certificate revocation with CRL
> - [CREDENTIALS.md](CREDENTIALS.md) - OCSP responder credentials

## 1. What is OCSP?

**Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP)** provides real-time certificate revocation checking. The QPKI implementation is compliant with **RFC 6960** (X.509 Internet PKI OCSP) and **RFC 5019** (Lightweight OCSP Profile). It supports classical algorithms (ECDSA, RSA, Ed25519), post-quantum (ML-DSA), and hybrid (Catalyst).

### OCSP vs CRL

| Criterion | CRL | OCSP |
|-----------|-----|------|
| Latency | Full download | Per-certificate query |
| Bandwidth | High (complete list) | Low (single response) |
| Real-time | No (update interval) | Yes |
| Privacy | No leakage | Responder sees queries |
| TLS Stapling | No | Yes |

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        OCSP Responder                               │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  ┌──────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐  │
│  │  HTTP Handler    │────│    Responder     │────│   CA Store   │  │
│  │  (GET + POST)    │    │    (RFC 6960)    │    │   (index)    │  │
│  └──────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └──────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Operation Modes:**

1. **Delegated Responder** (recommended)
   - Responder certificate with EKU `ocspSigning` (OID 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.9)
   - OCSP No Check extension to prevent recursion
   - Separate key from CA

2. **CA-Signed**
   - CA signs responses directly
   - Simpler but less flexible

---

## 2. CLI Commands

### ocsp sign

Create a signed OCSP response.

```bash
# Response "good" for valid certificate
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status good \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp

# Response "revoked" with reason
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status revoked \
  --revocation-time "2024-01-15T10:00:00Z" \
  --revocation-reason keyCompromise \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp

# Response "unknown"
qpki ocsp sign --serial 0A1B2C3D --status unknown \
  --ca ca.crt --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --out response.ocsp
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description | Default |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--serial` | Serial number (hex) | Required |
| `--status` | good, revoked, unknown | Required |
| `--ca` | CA certificate | Required |
| `--cert` | Responder certificate | Required |
| `--key` | Responder private key | Required |
| `--validity` | Response validity period | 1h |
| `--revocation-time` | Revocation date (RFC 3339) | - |
| `--revocation-reason` | CRL reason | - |
| `-o, --out` | Output file | stdout |

### ocsp verify

Verify an OCSP response.

```bash
# Basic verification
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt

# With target certificate
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt

# With nonce (replay protection)
qpki ocsp verify --response response.ocsp --ca ca.crt --nonce 0102030405060708
```

### ocsp request

Create an OCSP request.

```bash
# Simple request
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt --out request.ocsp

# With nonce (recommended)
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --cert server.crt --nonce --out request.ocsp

# By serial number
qpki ocsp request --ca ca.crt --serial 0A1B2C3D --out request.ocsp
```

### ocsp info

Display OCSP response information.

```bash
qpki ocsp info response.ocsp
```

### ocsp serve

Start an HTTP OCSP responder server.

```bash
# Delegated mode (dedicated responder cert)
qpki ocsp serve --port 8080 --ca-dir /path/to/ca \
  --cert responder.crt --key responder.key

# With custom validity
qpki ocsp serve --port 8080 --ca-dir /path/to/ca \
  --cert responder.crt --key responder.key --validity 24h
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description | Default |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--port` | HTTP port | 8080 |
| `--addr` | Full listen address | :8080 |
| `--ca-dir` | CA directory (with index.txt) | Required |
| `--cert` | Responder certificate | Required |
| `--key` | Responder private key | Required |
| `--validity` | Response validity | 1h |

---

## 3. Responder Profiles

```bash
# ECDSA (classical)
qpki credential enroll --profile ec/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=ocsp.example.com --id ocsp-responder

# ML-DSA (post-quantum)
qpki credential enroll --profile ml/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=pqc-ocsp.example.com --id pqc-ocsp-responder

# Hybrid Catalyst
qpki credential enroll --profile hybrid/catalyst/ocsp-responder \
    --var cn=hybrid-ocsp.example.com --id hybrid-ocsp-responder
```

---

## 4. OpenSSL Interoperability

```bash
# Create request with OpenSSL
openssl ocsp -issuer ca.crt -cert server.crt -reqout request.ocsp -no_nonce

# Query the server
openssl ocsp -issuer ca.crt -cert server.crt \
  -url http://localhost:8080 -resp_text

# Verify a response
openssl ocsp -respin response.ocsp -CAfile ca.crt -resp_text
```

> **Note:** OpenSSL does not support ML-DSA. Use `qpki ocsp verify` for PQC responses.

---

## 5. OCSP No Check Extension

The `id-pkix-ocsp-nocheck` extension (OID 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1.5) indicates the responder certificate should not be checked via OCSP, avoiding infinite loops. This extension is automatically added to `ocsp-responder` profiles.

---

## See Also

- [CA](CA.md) - Certificate revocation with CRL
- [CREDENTIALS](CREDENTIALS.md) - OCSP responder credentials
- [RFC 6960](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6960) - OCSP specification
- [RFC 5019](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5019) - Lightweight OCSP Profile
